so that I want to start by asking you
about an event that in a sense to me
really defines many of the questions
thrown out by the immense vulnerability
we feel about mortality and disease
which in the end is a great leveler
Steve Jobs you read his biography by
Walter Isaacson and well before Steve
ever knows that he's ill he's actually
somebody when he is not tripping acid is
actually being very careful about how he
eats he is you know doing fruit and
vegetable diets he's obsessive about his
fitness about his health and then in his
50s this iconic genius man goes just
like that redefining for many of us in
that Stanford commencement speech and
you understand for alumni how we look at
life and how we look at death great
leveller of that story of Steve Jobs it
doesn't matter if you're a genius it
doesn't matter how successful you are it
doesn't even matter how much care you
take to look after your health we just
don't under understand cancer do well
Steve Jobs death was a was a brutal
reminder to me about the extent to which
we have failed people like Steve Jobs by
that I mean you know here's a man who
gave us life altering technologies and
the question we need to ask ourselves is
did we give him life altering
technologies back and I think we didn't
and then the question is why not what
prevents us today from changing the
landscape of cancer now what's
interesting to me about Steve Jobs form
of cancer is I would i would bet you
that in a decade's time if we really put
our minds to it my suspicion is that
those variants of cancer these rare
variants of cancer that we begin to
understand probably will be treatable
not curable but all will be treatable so
it's really a failure of imagination to
me that that that death is a failure of
imagination now
the question that you are asking is you
know how does someone who's so obsessed
with their life with what they're living
become susceptible and the answer is
because cancer like unlike very on any
other disease cancer is it is inbuilt
into our genomes and that it let that
thought sink in because it really it's
not just a biological thought it's
really a philosophical thought and that
is that the very genes that allow our
bodies to grow or embryos to grow if you
take those jeans and you distort them if
you mutate them you unleash cancer you
can't therefore it's not a phenomenon
therefore that you can untwist it's very
much part of the normal cellular growth
process and when it goes or I it becomes
a cancer becomes a tumor so and that of
course gives rise to one of the biggest
challenges in medicine in cancer
medicine in medicine in general which is
how does one discriminate normal growth
from malignant growth that's the
challenge that was faced by Steve Jobs
and his doctors as well and this is a
question that keeps coming on over over
again as our population moves in the
world in some parts of the world towards
facing these chronic diseases well many
of these chronic diseases turn out to be
physical manifestations of normalcy
that's what's very complicated but it's
not like any other disease you do make
that point in your book about how in a
sense all of us in this room are
possibly carrying a cell that can mutate
at some form into a cancerous cell it
bites very nature by underneath which in
a sense really undoes previous
understandings of how to stop this how
to prevent it how to deal with it and if
we are all potentially cancerous beings
if I may use that phrase how do you
still make the point in your book and
you've made this repeatedly in
conversations afterwards that you wanted
to challenge the nihilism in a sense in
the mental response to cancer because
there seems to be something so
fatalistic Lee ordained if we're all
potentially going to have our bodies
mutely
into cancerous sets well the simplest
way to counteract that nihilism is to
make the argument that Richard olders
the famous epidemiologist who eventually
figured out the link between tobacco and
lung cancer which Richard Oh says the
death in old ages is always is an
inevitability it's death in young age
that's the problem that's the new
frontier let me put some numbers let me
put some numbers into context which area
in the United States one in three women
develop cancer during their lifetimes
one in four men and women would die of
cancer there it's a statistical
inevitability in that sense if you just
take young men and women dying of cancer
that let's hit the cutoff might be the
age 60 you still add hundreds of
thousands of deaths per year so so it's
actually simple to counter at the nail
ISM because you cannot be in a holistic
about an illness that is killing
literally hundreds of thousands of men
women every year you have to have some
way of understanding this and moving
ahead so i think that's that's my own
personal view against the nihilistic
qualities your your book is many things
you know it's it's it's a medical
perspective but it's also a deeply
personal interface between you as an
oncologist and your patients this book
was born in a question asked to you by
one of your patients who is suffering
from extreme form of abdominal cancer
please explain this to me explain to me
I'm willing to fight but tell me what
I'm fighting but when I'm hearing you
and I don't mean to be pessimistic this
beautiful morning and go out what I'm
actually hearing is the best that a
doctor can do is to say and you make
this point somewhere you want to live
long enough to see your son graduate
I'll help you get there you want to live
long enough to take your mother one last
time on that holiday you never took her
to I'll get you there beyond that gone
too much well I mean the question is
what is then beyond that right what is
the beyond I mean our lives are and I
make this part in the book too
lives are stitched together precisely
through these kinds of memories the
question of beyond of course extends
forever and the point I suspect is not
to extend lives and memories you know
into Methuselah but rather but rather in
fact figure out what to do about death
in young ages i call it you know there
is of course eyo the the greek
demigoddess who's cursed to live forever
and EO very famously says that the
Perseus you says that that it is her
curse because she watches everyone else
decay but she is Nicholas and in fact it
becomes her curse my point is that again
lives are stitched together through
memory we remember things we put our
foot so in fact the question of the
beyond becomes an abstract question
unless it's made into the concrete
question of what is now what happens
next what are you waiting for what
you're trying to do and I try to address
some of these questions in the center of
the book but how do you offer hope or
you don't oh you can i mean i think my
own sense of hope is hope is negotiable
there are no absolute hopes my own sense
of it is that it is negotiable in the
sense that everyone's if there are no
archetypal human beings there are no
archetypal memories so why do I should
there be an archetypal hope people's
hopes change they become reconciled to
realities and those hopes change over
time and if we create a kind of
archetypal way of looking at it if we
anatom eyes it without understanding
that there's a personality that lives
behind behind that anatomy I think we do
a big disservice we do a literary
disservice that's that's what sure you
said in your opening remarks that you
feel that in a sense Steve Jobs death
was a failure of imagination that here
was a man who stood for innovative
breakthrough technology and yet medical
technology in a way failed him did
medical technology fail to fail him
because it hasn't kept peace with new
understandings of cancer or you just
fail him because the human mind has not
reached that that critical moment what
acknowledged medical technology well I
think the human mind has not clearly
reached that in that critical moment and
the question is why not I I happen to
believe that this is a Justin was
talking about some elemental problems of
humans I happen to believe this is one
of those elemental problems in other
words as we move forward into our future
we just have to face up to these
problems you know you know energy food
water and health and so my suspicion is
that we're far from committing the kind
of resources the kind of resource
intensive pneus that we need to address
these kinds of problems the kind of
problems that affect human health not
only globally globally but also across
you know very specific very specific
nations you know the termination of life
caused by human immunodeficiency viruses
in sub-saharan Africa is is is obviously
going to has already changed sub-saharan
African history and will do so forever
so unless we contend with these kinds of
figures I think we're kind of losing
grip on what the real big problems are I
think you know that the lack of
resources is a major problem the Emperor
of all maladies is as much medicine as
it is history and literature in many
ways and you know you go back into
history you're looking for the first
recorded incidence of cancer they may
not have been called that there's this
absolutely riveting account of a Persian
queen who cuts off her breast which
would be the modern-day mastectomy right
but you make the interesting point that
from then to now actually the response
let's say to breast cancer hasn't
changed there's still this whispery
stigma embarrassment associated with it
why is that well for breast cancer in
particular it is not only about the
shame of the pathological body but
sexual shame it's actually that the the
juxtaposition of those two and we still
see it I recount the story
in the book of Fanny Rosa now in 1950
who calls up the New York Times and she
says she's a breast cancer survivor and
she says I'd like to place an
advertisement or for a survivor's group
of women with breast cancer and there's
a long pause and Rosen I was hanging on
the phone saying why is there this long
long pause and finally the society
editor of the New York Times gets on not
the health of the health editor but the
society area and says you know we stores
now we can't use the words breast and
cancer in the New York Times what if we
said that this was a survivor's group of
women with disease that the chest wall
so so it's it's it's literally death by
euphemism and and what's interesting is
that that some of that stigma still
survives today I'll be a good example of
this they're moving example to me in the
midst of a very dense statistical study
and such it reminds us of several themes
that will pick up in this conversation
about 10 about a decade ago a group of
researchers at Harvard started became
interested in the question whether
there's a link between obesity and
breast cancer and as you know that
actually led link epidemiologically has
been proven there is a link between
obesity and breast cancer so it might be
reasonable to ask the question whether
there's a link between a high-fat diet
and breast cancer I started as a very
very obviously a clinical
epidemiological study and they went to
they collected a cohort of women and ask
them to with breast cancer and an age
matched cohort of women without breast
cancer and they asked them what their
diets were in the preceding 10 years so
they recorded these diets and the answer
was very crystalline very clear women
with breast cancer had consumed diets
higher in fact women without breast
cancer matched had consumed diets lower
in fat case closed but there was a twist
it turns out that these women had also
recorded they had me actually chosen for
this reason they'd actually recorded
their real diets before the diagnosis of
breast cancer ten years ago so they went
back unlocked the cabinets and took
those questionnaires out which were the
real diets and was there a difference no
so in other words women with breast
cancer had selectively remembered
consuming diet this is in nineteen
ninety seven forty seven years after
Fanny rosenhaus called to the new york
times they had selectively remembered
diets higher in fact now you could ask
why because of guilt right because they
said to themselves I must have done
something wrong I must have done
something wrong with my body and what's
the big wrong that one does in 1997 you
know it's consuming a bag of potato
chips right and so even today when we
think that we've gone through this kind
of stigma the stigma still exists it's
very much part of us so it's a reminder
of how far we've come and how far we
haven't and you've said that one of the
reasons that you actually wrote this
book is a of course you didn't know what
to say to this patient who said to you
what am I battling and B because you
want to remove the stigma right how does
this stigma go weights it's ingrained I
think perhaps you make the point that
there's a there's a sexual embarrassment
especially maybe with forms of cancer
that relate to lots of the body that are
to do with our sexual organs did you
find that women respond in to that
extent differently from men one day I
mean just to give you one example of
cervical cancer which is killing
hundreds of thousands of women around
the world every year should largely be
an Eliminator disease through
vaccination and through you know
education in various other measures we
know that it's linked to a virus we have
vaccines against many strains of the
virus there's a huge debate going on in
the United States even as we speak
whether women should be vaccinated in to
some extent where they even men should
be vaccinated in fact it turns are the
few vaccinate boys you can actually
prevent cervical cancer in women so so
here's another good example this is 2011
there's a large debate going on partly
fed by religious orthodoxy but whether
we should be vaccinating women for a
preventable form of cancer seems to me
completely absurd this debate but very
much part of political debate in the
United States today and I think most
people i don't know wouldn't even know
that it is possible to have a preventive
vaccine i mean i don't know yeah
it's it was a very personal journey for
you you when you wrote this book i'm
curious to know where you walk that line
between not becoming a peddler of hope
where hope doesn't exist but being that
person who as you have said in your own
words is part of another person's life
in a hyper intense you know life
changing quite literally moment of their
existence do you get emotionally
attached I think you have to me I think
you know I tell people that I think
medicine is is the most complex
profession that we do as human beings it
involves kinds of dimensions of your
brain which I think are deployed in no
other professions from this from the
very scientific to the very to the to
using the literary aspects of your brain
to using epidemiology mathematics we
bring all of these things we funnel them
in and out comes this peculiar entity
that we call medicine and I think that
because of that reason I bring my work
home with me I should I encourage myself
to bring my work home with me I I I tell
myself this it would be it would be
absurd to leave such an intense form of
work behind so in fact every day around
dinner I mean we have a conversation or
what happened in the hospital I man also
researcher but every day I try to have
that conversation because it's it only
animates and makes real what what
already exists and it doesn't
compartmentalize it so so in fact i'm a
big proponent bring you home I tell my
students take your work home with you
don't pretend as if it stops when you
when you you know pick up your way to
pick up your dinner it doesn't stop and
if you if you pretend that you're in the
wrong profession what does that do to
your own emotional equilibrium because
the patient who actually was the reason
you wrote this book or was the starting
point for that journey she died she dies
yeah after six years of a remission she
dies what does that do to you
emotionally I think it it's you know
doctors grew I grieve
doctors grieve it's and it's it's part
of normal human life grieving is one of
the most fundamental things that we do
and if we forget to grieve we deny our
real reality which and I our mortality I
mean you know so why should be
compartmentalized grief in this wind is
very artificial way it seems to me a
kind of construction of a particular
variant of living well which seems very
hollowed to me in which you
compartmentalize your life you grieve in
only certain spaces and the other spaces
are not meant for leaving this kind of
compartmentalization to me is just
nonsensical so I don't believe in it I
don't buy it you know when when our
interactions with the world are not
compartmentalized in fact happen all the
time they happen in real time um in many
ways it's interesting because again
coming back to Steve Jobs there is this
whole argument being made that the
greatest mind stand at the intersection
of science and humanities and liberal
arts and I mean knowing having known you
personally from before and also this is
now well chronicled and it's evident in
your book you bring a lot of a literary
mindset to medicine to cancer was that
deliberate or did it just come to you as
a kind of instinctive second nature well
you know I was reminded of primo lady
whose book i think is probably
represents we were talking about you
know batteries that store kilowatts of
energy that that book primo Levy's book
survival of our swift's pound for pound
or paper for paper stores more kilowatts
of energy human energy than anything
I've ever read prima lady was was in
Auschwitz
was almost killed many of his
compatriots were killed in Auschwitz he
came out of all of this he harbored his
way really back to through a devastated
Germany back to Italy and at the end of
it someone asked him what prema living
he wrote this book many of these books
the periodic table being one of them
survival at Auschwitz being the other
one which are so which are chronicles of
the Muslim most beautiful and the most
of the most amazing books I've ever read
and someone says people how do you
define yourself and he said I'm a
chemist and to me the humility in that
is very very reflective you know people
lady did not say to himself I'm going to
change world literature he said I'm a
chemist and the workflow doubt of that
he was once asked actually it's very
interesting too he was once asked well
why did you survived Auschwitz you know
millions of Jews were cured what made
you survived Auschwitz and he said
movingly he said well I was young and I
could speak more than one language right
so for instance it's what he didn't say
that's very important he didn't say oh
because I had so much resilience oh it's
because I had so many skills it's
because there was my my street smarts
and so he in some ways and you know this
worker but in some ways all of that is
stitched into the book but you never
find it so you know was I looking for a
literary inspiration I didn't define
literary inspiration because it was
plenty there well as the first warning
bell comes sort of like a metaphor for
life and death I'm just wondering uh
Steve Jobs sort of made us question our
understanding of death and therefore our
understanding of life how's that happen
for you as someone who work so closely
with people who pretty much within a
finite time well we all die within a
finite a but maybe this is a kind of
accelerated interface with death has it
changed your understanding of life
because you said somewhere that in a
sense it's like the debate around cancer
strips you naked and then just leaves
you with the basics of life yes I mean
how can it not I mean I
you know I flew across the flew across
the Atlantic and I was off the grid for
12 hours I landed I opened my email and
there were a record of three deaths how
can it not change your life and you know
how has it changed you as a person the
changes are so deep that that even
recount them would become like
recounting the entire story of this
journey just simply speaking it's it's
obviously very humbling experience it's
a you live that line and and the
question is I mean how do you then live
with with fear we talked a little bit
earlier about living with a different
kind of here this to the fear of this
variant of mortality is also like like
the sword of Damocles hanging on your
head all the time and the question is
how do you then live the fulfillment of
your life one's life through all of this
and my answer is really it really forces
us to reimagine what what living is and
what is it stitching together of memory
creating creating a space for oneself
that is enriched enriching for others
you know the kind of things that we take
for very much for granted become very
powerful and you know they become
immediately powerful when you hear that
when you hear this word the patients
often say that it's it's like a wake-up
call from the other side of life and and
to me having heard this in the voices of
others all the time I certainly sense it
myself you said somewhere as we wind
down in this conversation that thousands
of books had actually been written on
cancer before you started writing this
one and yet you felt you couldn't answer
the most basic questions of your
patients um do you think we're any
closer to answering those questions
today oh I think we are very much so as
I said just to give you the example of
of jobs do both jobs case I mean I think
there is very little doubt to me that we
will probably change the landscape in in
the future we just have to be we have to
be clever about doing this we have to
inspire a generation of science
you know the Japanese speak about a lost
decade as you know very well my fear my
biggest fear is that in the midst of the
kind of distractions that we have we're
going to face a lost decade of science
and that lost ahead of science is going
to really impact all of our lives we
can't afford a lost decade of science
the kind of energy that the 35 year old
has a 25 or 35 year old has is
fundamentally different from the kind of
energy that a 45 or 55 year old has if
we can't give if you can't empower the
25 or 35 year old to engage in what I
think is one of the most rich
conversations we've had as a
civilization the scientific conversation
we're doing them enormous to service and
we will pay for that disservice with our
lives this will give you one number to
hang your hats on the annual budget of
the National Cancer Institute in America
and just to use that's just one example
the other cancer institute's around the
world is five billion dollars the annual
budget of the Food and Drug
Administration in America is four
billion dollars the United States spent
more per month in Iraq in 2008 than the
combined annual budgets of the National
Cancer Institute and the food and drug
administration let's just give you one
example of the kind of resources that
are being expended in arenas in
comparison to very fundamental things
about health and I'm getting the sign I
think that we have to close so let me
end on I'm sorry I don't think we're
taking questions so I and sell later
please we're not we're not doing
questions and sidharth is here and maybe
you can sort of catch him in the
corridor and and have a chat with him I
was going to because we've spoken about
such deep things just end on a lighter
note that when the New York Times said
that you don't look like a scientist
what scientists meant to look like I
don't know but uh I don't know Isis
fected that they wanted mean a white
coat I don't know it was just it was
just a little bit I was mystified i
wrote to Charles McGrath and I said what
were you expecting and it was I think
they wanted to lighten up the
conversation themselves and so therefore
I got stuck with this I got stuck with
the line but there you have it it's a
great line thank you for your inspiring
book and your thoughts this morning
thank you very much about
you